"JavaScript is a versatile and powerful scripting language. This means JavaScript is used to create logic that will make a webpage respond to the interactions from a user. Alongside HTML and CSS, JavaScript is one of the core technologies of the World Wide Web." https://github.com/learn-academy-2024-alpha/syllabus/blob/main/javascript/intro.md

***
## Vocabulary

- JavaScript
- data types
- primitive data type
- composite data type
- number
- float
- modulo operator
- string
- concatenation
- Boolean
- undefined
- null
- symbol
- type coercion
- variable
- variable declaration
- camelCase
- assignment operator
- index
- build-in method
- argument
***
## Fundamentals

 **Primitive data types** are the building blocks of the language that cannot be broken down into any simpler parts.
 Primitive Data Types
 * There are 6
	 * Number
	 * String
	 * Boolean
	 * Undefined
	 * Null
	 * Symbol

**Composite data types** are collections of other data types.

***
### Number
Data type made of whole numbers and fractions.  Includingd positive, negatives, and zero.  Fractions are written as a decimal and called a **Float**.

```js
// Whole number
8

// Float
8.7
```

Used for math/evaluations.  Can do addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and exponents.

**Modulo**: Operation for numbers that will return the whole number remaining in a division problem.

```js
// addition
2 + 2
// output: 4
0.1 + 0.2
// output: 0.3
3.7 + 5
// output: 8.7

// subtraction
2 - 2
// output: 0

// multiplication
2 * 2
// output: 4

// division
2 / 2
// output: 1
2 / 0
// output: Infinity

// exponents
7 ** 2
// output: 49

// modulo
2 % 2
// output: 0
3 % 2
// output: 1
18 % 5
// output: 3
```

### Strings
A collection of characters within quotes.
```js
"Hello World!"
"69"
```

Many different things can be done with strings, one of note is **Concatenation**

**Concatenation**: Joining multiple strings

```js
"hell" + "o"
// output: "hello"

"hello " + "world"
// output: "hello world"

"3 + 4"
// output: "3 + 4"

"3 + 4" + "5"
// output: "3 + 45"
```

## Boolean
Returns either true or false.
```js
true
// output: true

false
// output: false
```

## Undefined
A variable that has been created but not assigned a value.
```js
var example
// output: undefined
```

## Null
Equal to nothing else.  It does not represent zero, it does not represent false.  It literally represents NOTHING.

## Symbol
Created in Javascript with ECMAScript 2015.  Unique, immutable.  Used for the key in a JavaScript object

***
# Type Coercion

This is what happens when you ask JS to make comparisons/evaluations about data types that are NOT compatible.  This should be AVOIDED at all costs.  Examples:
```js
"2" + 2
// output: "22"
true * 9
// output: 9
false * 9
// output: 0
```

***
# Running JavaScript
When running JS within the Terminal, we simply use ```node```
Example:
```js
node test-file.js
```

If we want to see some output in our Terminal, we can add ```console.log``` to our code
Example:
```js
console.log(6 + 7)
// output: 13
```

***

# Variables
The manipulation of data is the entire point of any programming language.  Sometimes we need to label our information into easier to manage *containers*.  These containers are called **Variables**.

When creating a variable in JS there are four things we need to keep in mind:
1. Variable declaration
	* Tell JS what we are doing.  This is called **Variable Declaration**.  Usually this is done using ```var```.  If we have no plans to modify a variable we can use ```const```.
2. Variable name
	* You can name a variable virtually anything you want. (There are some protected words).  When naming a variable, it is best practice to use **camelCase**.  That is, first word is lowercase, every following word is capitalized. Example: ```thisIsHowYouDoIt```.  Your variable names should communicate your intentions for the variable.
3. Assignment Operator
	* Once a variable is named and declared, JS will recognize its existence.  With nothing but the name and declaration, a variable will have a value of **undefined**.  To give a variable value we use an **Assignment Operator**.  
	  
	  An assignment variable is simply ```=``` after the variable name.  Example:
```js
const thisIsWhatMyVariableDoes =
```
4. Data
	* This is the information contained within our variable.  The information MUST be something recognized by JS. (JS data type)
	  
	  Examples:
```js
// variable declaration
var myNum
console.log(myNum)
// output: undefined

// variable declared and assigned
var myNum = 2
console.log(myNum)
// output: 2

console.log(myNum + 5)
// output: 7

console.log(myNum * 7)
// output: 14

console.log(myNum + myNum)
// output: 4

// variable reassigned
myNum = null
console.log(myNum)
// output: null

myNum = "hello"
console.log(myNum)
// output: "hello"

console.log(myNum + myNum)
// output: "hellohello"

console.log(myNum + 5)
// output: "hello5"
```

***
# String Methods and Properties
As stated above, strings are a collection of characters within quotes and have properties of their data type.

An example is that every string has a **length** property.  Each character can be accounted for by where it falls within the strings **Index**.  A string is always zero indexed.  This means that the first character starts with a 0 and moves up from there.

```js
// returning a length property of the string
console.log("hello".length)
// output: 5

// referencing a single character from the string by its index
console.log("hello"[0])
// output: "h"
console.log("hello"[2])
// output: "l"
```

### Built-in Methods
Some stuff is commonly needed by devs.  Instead of having to create a function every time someone wants to build something, some are already built-in to the language.  Built-in methods usually need further information.  This information is known as **Arguments**

Examples:
```js
var greeting = "hello"

// upcase all the letters in a string
console.log(greeting.toUpperCase())
// output: "HELLO"

// returns the character that is at a particular index
console.log(greeting.charAt(1))
// output: "e"

// returns the index of a particular character
console.log(greeting.indexOf("e"))
// output: 1

// returns a Boolean value if a subset of characters exists within the string
console.log(greeting.includes("he"))
// output: true

// returns a subset of a string based on a starting and ending index
console.log(greeting.slice(1, 3))
// output: "el"
```

***
# What Did You Learn? HOPEFULLY...
If you can answer the following questions, I did my job.  If you can't, get ahold of me, let me know where I can improve!!  **I AM HERE FOR YOU**...
***
### Challenges

Copy the challenges into your JavaScript file. Comment out the instructions and code the solution to each problem beneath the prompt.

- Write the code that will log the output of 34 added to 71.
- Write the code that will log the output of 67 subtracted from 123.
- Write the code that will log the output of 56 multiplied by 23.
- Write the code that will log the output of 45 divided by 5.
- Write the code that will log the output of 5 to the power of 7.
- Write the code that will log the whole number remainder of 33 divided by 6.
- Write the code that will log the length of a string containing your name.
- Write the code that will log whether your string includes the letter "e"?
- Write the code that will log the character at the first index of the string.
- Write the code that will log the string in all uppercase letters.

Consider the variables:

```js
const theQuestion = "life, the universe, and everything"
const theAnswer = 42
```

- Write the code that will log `theAnswer` divided by 2.
- Write the code that will log the whole number remainder of `theAnswer` when divided by 3.
- Write the code that will log the length of `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will log the length of `theQuestion` divided by 2.
- Write the code that will log the length of `theQuestion` added to `theAnswer`.
- Write the code that will log the index of the character `"f"` in the `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will log the index of the second comma in the `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will log the concatenation of the two variables.
- Write the code that will log the character `"l"` from `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will extract `"the universe"` from `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will extract `"everything"` from `theQuestion`.
- Write the code that will log the last character of `theQuestion` without manually counting the number of characters.
*** 
***
***
# ONLY SCROLL FURTHER IF YOU WANT THE ANSWERS TO THE ABOVE

