"Arrays are variables that store collections of data in an ordered list. Having an organized data set gives developers the ability to access particular pieces of information, access every item in the set, or make a decision about every item in the data set. Arrays are indexed which means the data can be accessed by its location within the array. Arrays also have many built-in methods that can be used to manipulate and access the content."(https://github.com/learn-academy-2024-alpha/syllabus/blob/main/javascript/arrays.md)

***
## Vocabulary

- array
- element
- value
- index
- zero indexed
- built-in method
- argument
- mutator/setter methods
- accessor/getter methods
- destructuring
***
## Arrays: Collections of Data
So far, we have worked with a single piece of info at a time.  Be it a single number, string, or an element on a page.  It has all been one at a time.  Sometimes we need to work with more than that.

Example:  We want to have a list of the months of a year.

To do the above example, we could utilize an array.

**Array**:  A collection of ordered data (a list).  They can contain any type of information, granted it is a data type recognized by JavaScript.

**Examples**:
```js
var months = ["January", "February", "March", "April", "May", "June"]

var numbers = [17, 15, 14, 3, 5, 10]

var comboDataArray = [
  17,
  "January",
  true,
  "March 14",
  42,
  null,
  false,
  "LEARN",
  10
]
``` 
***
## Anatomy of an Array
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

An array is built of the following:
1. Variable Declaration
	1. Same as any variable, we need to inform JS of our intentions
	2. `var`
2. Variable Name
	1. Should be in camelaCase and also be descriptive
	2. `var learnStudents`
3. Single Equal Sign  
	1. Variables have to be assigned with a single equal sign
	2. `var learnStudents =`
4. Opening and Closing Square Brackets ```[]```
	1. The arrays contents are stored within the brackets
	2. `var learnStudents = []`
5. Elements in the Array
	1. Each item in an array is known as an element
	2. Each element is separated by a comma
	3. Elements must be a data type recognized by JS
	4. `var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel" ]`
***
## Value
Like stated above, each element within an array must be a recognized JS data type.  What is contained within each Element is called the **VALUE**
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```
* "Debra" is a value within the array
* "Jonas" is a value within the array
* "Joel" is a value within the array
***
## Index
Each value within an array has a location that is known as the **INDEX**

**Indexes**: A sequential number that are comparable to an address.  Each element in an array has one.  Arrays are **zero indexed**.

**Zero Indexed**: Elements are numbered, starting with 0.  So the first Element of an array is #0

```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```
- The value `"Debra"` is at the index of `0`
- The value `"Jonas"` is at the index of `1`
- The value `"Joel"` is at the index of `2`
***
## Accessing Elements
An important benefit of storing data within an array is our ability to access an individual value.  Remember that an index is like an address? Because of this, we can reference a variable that holds the entire array and the specific index in square brackets in order to retrieve the value.  If we request an index that does not exist, we will get **UNDEFINED** back
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents[0])
// output: "Debra"

console.log(learnStudents[2])
// output: "Joel"

console.log(learnStudents[6])
// output: undefined
```
***
## Changing Elements 
When we reference an array and an index, we are pretty much creating a variable with that specific value.  Just the same as any other variable, we can reassign its value with a single `=` and a new item.  By doing so, we forever change the array

**Example**:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

learnStudents[0] = "Summer"
console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Summer", "Jonas", "Joel"]

learnStudents[1] = "Brian"
console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Summer", "Brian", "Joel"]
```
***
## Length Property
Since an array is an ordered collection of data, it will have a length property.  Array lengths are dynamic, meaning it can change depending on the dev. `.length` is an informational command that will tell us how many elements are in an array.  
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.length)
// output: 3
```
***
## Built- in Methods 

Small bit of functionality that has been added to a language to accomplish a common task.

Arrays are popular, so arrays already have a bunch of built-in methods.

Sometimes (most of the time) methods need further information to get the job done.  This information will be passed within the `()` and is known as an **ARGUMENT**.

As far as arrays are concerned, built-in methods come in two different flavors. **MUTATORS** and **ACCESSORS**

**Mutator**:  Built-in methods that modify the original array.  Also known as "**SETTER METHODS**"
**Accessors**: Built-in methods that do not change the original array. Also known as "GETTER METHODS"

***
### Mutators
These will modify the array that the method is called upon.

**IMPORTANT**:
The output of this method is not always going to be an array.
### .push(value)
* Adds a value onto the **END** of an array.
* Takes an argument of the value we want to add.
* Data type **MUST** be recognized by JS.
* The output will be the length of the new array.

**Example**:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.push("Ryan"))
// output: 4

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel", "Ryan"]
```

#### **.pop( )**
* Removes the **LAST** value in the array.
* Output is going to be the value that we removed. 

**Example**:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.pop())
// output: "Joel"

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas"]
```

#### **.unshift(value)**
* Adds a value to the beginning of an array
* Takes an argument of what is to be added
* The argument must be a data type recognized by JS
*  The output is going to be the length of the new array.

Example:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.unshift("Rachael"))
// output: 4

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Rachael", "Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.shift()**
* Removes the value at the zero index.
* Output will be the value removed.

Example:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.shift())
// output: "Debra"

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.reverse()**
* Will reverses the order of values within the array.
* The output will be the modified array.

Example:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.reverse())
// output: ["Joel", "Jonas", "Debra"]

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Joel", "Jonas", "Debra"]
```

#### **.sort()**
* Will put the values within an array into alphabetical order.
* More advanced sorting can be accomplished with an argument.
* Output will be the modified array.
* Can use arguments for numbers instead of alphabetical

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.sort())
// output: ["Debra", "Joel", "Jonas"]

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Joel", "Jonas"]

var numbers = [4, 2, 5, 1, 3]
numbers.sort((a, b) => a - b)
console.log(numbers)

// [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```
***

## Accessors
Methods that **DO NOT** modify the original array.  Accessors will either return a specific output or a new arrray.  To keep an accessors output we need to save it as a variable.

#### **.indexOf(value)**
* Returns the index of the first instance of a given value.
* Returns `-1`d if a value does not exist within the array.
*  Its an accessor, so as stated, the original array is **NOT** modified

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.indexOf("Joel"))
// output: 2

var joelIndex = learnStudents.indexOf("Joel")
console.log(joelIndex)
// output: 2

console.log(learnStudents.indexOf("Mary"))
// output: -1

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.lastIndexOf(value)**
* Will return the last index of any given value.
* Very useful when an array has repeating values.
* `-1` will be the output if a value does not exist within the array.
* Original array will be **UNMODIFIED**.

**Examples**:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Joel", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.lastIndexOf("Joel"))
// output: 3

var lastJoelIndex = learnStudents.lastIndexOf("Joel")
console.log(lastJoelIndex)
// output: 3

console.log(learnStudents.lastIndexOf("Mary"))
// output: -1

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.slice(startingIndex, endingIndex)**
* Will return a subset of an array.
* Requires an argument for the starting index of the subset.
* Ending index is optional, if no end is specified, it will default to the end of the array.
* **ORIGINAL ARRAY IS UNCHANGED**

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.slice(0, 2))
// output: ["Debra", "Mary"]

console.log(learnStudents.slice(2))
// output: ["Jonas", "Joel"]

var slicedArray = learnStudents.slice(2)
console.log(slicedArray)
// output: ["Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.concat()**
* Merges two or more arrays to form one combined array
* **ORIGINAL ARRAY LEFT UNCHANGED**
* Strings can be added to an array

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents1 = ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
var learnStudents2 = ["Mary", "Juan", "Matt"]

console.log(learnStudents1.concat(learnStudents2))
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel", "Mary", "Juan", "Matt"]

var comboArrays = learnStudents1.concat(learnStudents2)
console.log(comboArrays)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel", "Mary", "Juan", "Matt"]

console.log(learnStudents1)
// output: ["Debra", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

 ***

## Strings to Arrays and Back Again

Similarities between strings and arrays:
* Collections of data
* Have length properties
* Zero-Indexed

Sometimes, it is useful to be able to convert these data types back and fourth

#### **.join("")**
* **Converts all values within the array to a string.**
* Can take an optional argument to describe what is between each value
* **ORIGINAL ARRAY UNMODIFIED**

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents = ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.join())
// output: "Debra,Mary,Jonas,Joel"

console.log(learnStudents.join(""))
// output: "DebraMaryJonasJoel"

console.log(learnStudents.join(" "))
// output: "Debra Mary Jonas Joel"

console.log(learnStudents.join("-"))
// output: "Debra-Mary-Jonas-Joel"

var joinedNames = learnStudents.join(" ")
console.log(joinedNames)
// output: "Debra Mary Jonas Joel"

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

#### **.split("")**
* **Converts a string to an array**
* Can take an optional argument to explain where the string is split.
* **ORIGINAL ARRAY UNMODIFIED**

Examples:
```js
var learnStudents = "Debra Mary Jonas Joel"

console.log(learnStudents.split())
// output: ["Debra Mary Jonas Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.split(""))
// output: ["D", "e", "b", "r", "a", " ", "M", "a", "r", "y", " ", "J", "o", "n", "a", "s", " ", "J", "o", "e", "l"]

console.log(learnStudents.split(" "))
// output: ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents.split("a"))
// output: ["Debr", " M", "ry Jon", "s Joel"]

var splitNames = learnStudents.split(" ")
console.log(splitNames)
// output: ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]

console.log(learnStudents)
// output: ["Debra", "Mary", "Jonas", "Joel"]
```

***
## Array Destructuring
A special way of assigning variables within JS.

**Destructuring**: Allows you to take an array and unpack each value into individual variables in a single assignment.

To destructure we need variable names within square brackets and an equal number of values.  Each variable will be assigned in order.

Examples:
```js
var [firstName, secondName] = ["Mary", "Debra"]

console.log(firstName)
// output: "Mary"

console.log(secondName)
// output: "Debra"
```

***
## Challenges
Copy the challenges into your JavaScript file. Comment out the instructions and code the solution to each problem beneath the prompt.

Consider the variable:

```js
var groceryList = ["chips", "dip", "cookies"
```

- Write the code that will add "soda" to the end of the original array.


- Write the code that will add "granola" to the end of the array without altering the original array.


- Write the code that will return a subset of the array containing only "chips" and "dip".


- Write the code that will add "beans" to the "chips" and "dip" array.



Consider the variable:

```js
var numbers = [2, 4, 6, 8, 10]
```

- Write the code that will add the number 0 to the beginning of the array.
- Write the code that will add the number 12 to the end of the array.
- Write the code that will remove the first number from the array.
- Write the code that will add the number 0 to the beginning of the array without altering the original array. **HINT**: it's not `.unshift` You'll have to get creative! ;)

Consider the variable:

```js
var numSet = [2, 13, 6, 8, 4, 2]
```

- Write the code that finds the index of the first appearance of the number 2.
- Write the code that finds the index of the last appearance of the number 2.
- Write the code that returns the number at the third index.

Consider the variable:

```js
var characters = ["y", "a", "r", "r", "a"]
```

- Write the code that brings all the letters in the characters array together into a string.
- Write the code that reverses the order of the letters in the characters array and saves it into a variable called charsReversed.
- Write the code that brings all the letters in the charsReversed array together into a string with an asterisk between each letter.
- Write the code that brings all the letters in the charsReversed array together into a string without separators.

Create two arrays consisting of three first names of your cohort members in each array.

- Write the code that sorts the names in alphabetical order.
- Write the code that sorts the names in reverse alphabetical order.
- Write the code that sorts all the names in alphabetical order in a single array.

Consider the variables:

```js
var numbers = [42, 221, 71, 7, 18, 87]
var oddIndexes = []
```

- Write the code that logs the values from the numbers array that are at odd indexes.
- Write the code that adds the values from odd indexes into the oddIndexes array.